---
permalink: /mentorship/
title: "Mentorship"
---

In Zen the saying goes when the student is ready the teacher appears, and we acknowledge that mentoring can only happen if the student is ready. In our lab, all are teachers and students at the same time. Finding the right mentor for a given task is an important step towards its completion. Roles, status, and hierarchies are considered fluent and non-substantial. They are only enforced through the authority of competence and only if helpful for a specific task. The most competent person for a given task has also the most to contribute and the largest say. With this acknowledgment the invitation emerges to mentor fellow lab members towards a better or more fundamental understanding of a given problem.

## Individual mentorship for students from India

[Rajanikanth](https://www.evolutionguy.net) and Thomas met at a chai shop at the University of Mysore in India in 2015. At that time, Raj was a MSc student interested in evolution and Thomas PhD student with a fascination for the same topic. We bonded over several books, developed a friendship over the years and mentored each other. Thomas, Rai on how to navigate science, statistics, and writing. Raj, Thomas on how science works in India, molecular evolution, and fly genetics. Raj is now completing his PhD and is applying for Postdocs. Thomas has lived for many years in India and loves country and its people. Raj is born in India and knows all the beautiful and difficult parts of the journey through a university in India. Since some time, we played with the idea to extend our mutual mentorship experience to other people by taking on mentees from India. We would like to mentor students who are in the first generation in their family to go to university. We will share our experience and will help you to achieve your goals buy providing feedback and advice on the navigation through University. If you are interested write a short letter of motivation to Raj [email](mailto:rajanikanth.cnayak@gmail.com) and/or Thomas [email](mailto:dr.thomas.wolfers@gmail.com). 
