---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
---

## Foundations of Mental Health Mapping  
Sometimes it is unclear what constitutes a disorder and what is healthy or normative, especially if the disorder is a consequence of unwholesome mental states. We explore the foundations of what constitutes health, disorder, or disease and explore questions such as. What is healthy? What is the right reference group to test a disease against? Can we utilize systematic explorations of the mind as tools to understand it? In the long run this work contributes to the theoretical foundation of mental health mapping, incorporating first and third person perspectives on mental health. We work together with philosophers, clinicians and patients who provide insights into clinical practice and inform our science in theoretical and practical ways. 

## Structures of Mental Health Mapping
We know that mental disorders run, with varying degrees, in families, are comorbid, and heterogenous. Mental health and disorder require a structure from which it emerges. Sometimes this structure maybe the biology at the level of the individual patient, in other cases psychodynamics between individuals, or groups in society. In our lab we explore these structures. Our work will be guided by questions such as what makes one sibling with a disorder different from another who is healthy? What are the interpersonal factors contributing to mental health? Does it make sense to treat the family instead of the individual with a given disorder? What is the role of society and which policies and treatments are improving our mental health? We work together with scientists, clinicians and social workers using large scale studies that contain information on for instance family structure.

## Markers for Mental Health Mapping
The factors underlying mental health or disorder are not well understood and a complex web of biological and non-biological variables interact producing symptoms in any given individual. This is one of the reasons why we have limited insights into the markers linked to illness and we often do not know if a given treatment works before it has been tried. Through multimodal approaches we aim to detect hidden factors underlying illness and are guided by questions such as what makes one person different from another when diagnosed with the same disorder? How can we uncover predictive markers for illness? Which data modalities are informative for which disorder or disease process? We work together with scientists and clinicians interested in different disorders and diseases and companies with innovative approaches regarding e.g. the development of sensors.

## Models for Mental Health Mapping 
Most of the earlier described research directions require machine learning as tool. Therefore, we apply and develop these approaches (e.g., normative modelling) for large scale imaging, electrophysiological, genetic and sensor data. Our methods are adapted to high dimensional domain data and often very unreliable labels. Our work is guided by question such as how can we utilize machine learning across modalities? What methods are best to parse heterogeneity? Which longitudinal modelling procedures are suited to deal with the properties of the underlying data structures? How can we increase the interpretability of our models and ultimately how can we take machine learning from the lab to clinical practice? We work together with scientist who are interested in machine learning, statistics, and methods development.

## Top-10 Publications

1.	Wolfers, Thomas; …; Marquand, Andre F; (2015). From estimating activation locality to predicting disorder: a review of pattern recognition for neuroimaging-based psychiatric diagnostics. Neuroscience & Biobehavioural Reviews. [link](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.08.001)
* SUMMARY: In this seminal paper, we showed that with increasing sample size the accuracy of pattern classification approaches for the prediction of mental disorders decreased. This is counterintuitive and in conflict with evidence in other fields that use pattern recognition approaches to predict e.g., image classes, likes cats and dogs. Generally, machine learning algorithms perform better with more training data. Therefore, this finding was very surprising. We could attribute it in parts to the high heterogeneity of mental disorders and a publication bias for better performing but not representative models. This work contributed to a debate on cross-validation failures and provides important evidence for the development of methods to map heterogeneity of mental disorders.
2.	Marquand, Andre F; Wolfers, Thomas; …; Beckmann, Christian F; (2016). Beyond lumping and splitting: a review of computational approaches for stratifying psychiatric disorders. Biological psychiatry: cognitive neuroscience and neuroimaging. [link](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsc.2016.04.002)
* SUMMARY: We showed the problems of stratification approaches in psychiatry and developed a strategy based on normative modelling that can improve these problems.
3.	Wolfers, Thomas; …; Westlye, Lars; Marquand, Andre F; (2018). Mapping the heterogeneous phenotype of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder using normative models. JAMA psychiatry. [link](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.2467)
* SUMMARY: We mapped the heterogeneity of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder showing an individualized profile of deviations from the norm. These results were very surprising and framed by the media as "Who is the average patient in psychiatry?". The results have been frequently replicated by us and other groups using various algorithms and samples.
4.	Wolfers, Thomas; …; Franke, Barbara; Marquand, Andre F; (2019) Individual differences v. the average patient: mapping the heterogeneity in ADHD using normative models. Psychological medicine. [link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291719000084)
* SUMMARY: We mapped the heterogeneity of ADHD at the level of the individual patient, showing that each patient had a distinct profile of deviations from the norm.
5.	Wolfers, Thomas; …; Beckmann, Christian F; (2019). From pattern classification to stratification: towards conceptualizing the heterogeneity of Autism Spectrum Disorder. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. [link](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.07.010)
* SUMMARY: We showed that clustering approaches used to parse the heterogeneity of Autism(s) require more external replications and validations.
6.	Llera; Alberto; Wolfers, Thomas; …; Beckmann, Christian F; (2019) Inter-individual differences in human brain structure and morphometry link to population variation in demographics and behavior. Elife. [link](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.44443.001)
* SUMMARY: We could show that brain structure explaines a large proportion of functional interactions between different regions in the healthy human brain.
7.	Wolfers, Thomas; (2019). Towards precision medicine in psychiatry. Dissertation [link](http://hdl.handle.net/2066/201200)
* SUMMARY: We developed a precision medicine approach for psychiatry and discussed necessary next steps and introduced a roadmap towards this goal.
8.	Wolfers, Thomas; …; Westlye, Lars T; (2021). Replicating extensive brain structural heterogeneity in individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Human Brain Mapping. [link](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20095091)
* SUMMARY: We replicated our earlier finding that patients in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and showed an individualized profile of normative deviations.
9.	Rutherford, Saige; …; Wolfers, Thomas; …; Marquand, Andre F; (2022). Charting brain growth and aging at high spatial precision. Elife. [link](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.72904)
* SUMMARY: We charted normative models at high spatial precision for samples that are larger than 50k individuals. This is the first massive population scale neuroimaging based normative modelling approach that can be translated to new samples and is freely available online for other scientists to use. 
10.	Leonardsen, Esten; …; Westlye, Lars T #; Wolfers, Thomas #; Yunpeng, Wang # (2022). Deep neural networks learn general and clinically relevant representations of the ageing brain. NeuroImage. # shared last author [link](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.29.21265645)
* SUMMARY: We trained a deep neural network on one of the largest data resources assembled today (N > 50k) to predict the aging brain. We transferred this model to make clinical predictions and share our model and the resource for others to use.

### All publications can be found on [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=KJaA3sEAAAAJ&hl=nl)
